Whole-School Evaluation – Management, Leadership and Learning Dates of inspection  11-03-2020 Inspection activities undertaken  Meetings with principal and the leadership and management team   Meeting with representative of the board of management  Meeting with parent representative  Meeting with teachers  Review of relevant documents    Analysis of parent, pupil and teacher questionnaires  Observation of teaching and learning   Examination of pupils’ work   Interaction with pupils   Feedback to principal, deputy principal and teachers, and to parent and board representatives  This evaluation was paused due to the school closures arising from the Covid-19 pandemic. While the majority of inspection activities took place in March 2020, the feedback meetings were not held until October 2020.   SCHOOL CONTEXT Scoil Náisiúnta Cnoc An Mharcaigh is a co-educational primary school under the patronage of the Catholic Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise. The school has an administrative principal, eleven mainstream class teachers and four special education teachers. At the time of the evaluation, there were 283 pupils enrolled and attendance levels were very good overall.   SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS:  FINDINGS  The quality of pupils’ learning is good overall with pupils displaying appropriate levels of content mastery across a range of subjects; their communication skills in Irish are underdeveloped.  The quality of teaching is good overall; there is considerable variance in teachers’ approaches to developing pupils’ self-assessment skills in identifying strengths and areas for development as learners.  The quality of leadership and management is very good overall.  The quality of support for pupils’ well-being is very good.  The overall quality of school self-evaluation (SSE) is very good.    RECOMMENDATIONS  A whole-school approach should be agreed and implemented to develop pupils' communication skills in Irish incrementally and systematically.  Teachers should adopt whole-school approaches to support pupils to reflect on their learning in a more consistent and developmental manner.     DETAILED FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  1. THE QUALITY OF PUPILS’ LEARNING  The overall quality of pupils’ learning is good. Pupils demonstrate positive dispositions towards their learning. They display appropriate levels of content mastery across a range of subjects. Most pupils display commendable ability to apply their knowledge of relevant processes in Mathematics and Social, Environmental and Scientific Education to a variety of appropriate contexts, including real-life situations. In the Inspectorate questionnaires, most pupils agreed that they enjoy their lessons and learning and almost all parents agreed that their child is doing well in school.   Pupils experiment in imaginative ways with a range of art materials to produce high quality creations in Visual Arts. They demonstrate keen awareness of the work of various artists.   Pupils enjoy listening and responding to music and are enabled to make music individually and collaboratively. They engage with percussion instruments to demonstrate rhythm very effectively. There is a lack of incremental development in pupils’ knowledge of musical literacy; a whole-school approach should be devised and implemented to support progression in this area of learning.   Pupils are provided with opportunities to engage in thematic and integrated projects of work, including engineering-based and open-ended, design and make activities. In the majority of lessons observed, participation in learning was of a very high standard when pupils were provided with opportunities to collaborate and demonstrate their creativity.     Whole-school emphasis on pupils’ use of non-reusable workbooks should be reduced with a view to making increased provision for active and engaging learning experiences.  Infant pupils have access to a broad range of structured and open-ended materials to support playful learning. Opportunities exist to enhance their language learning by facilitating purposeful engagement in socio-dramatic play.  The majority of pupils are confident and articulate communicators in English with very good use of subject-specific vocabulary across a broad range of curricular areas.   Sa Ghaeilge, tá scileanna cumarsáide sásúil ag na daltaí. Tá siad in ann abairtí simplí a thuiscint agus a úsáid ach téann sé dian orthu comhrá a bheith acu go nadúrtha. Ba chóir cur chuige uile scoile a aontú agus a chur i bhfeidhm chun scileanna cumarsáide na ndaltaí a fhorbairt go céimniúil agus go córasach. In Irish, the pupils have satisfactory communication skills. They are able to understand and use simple sentences but they find it difficult to converse naturally. A whole-school approach should be agreed and implemented to develop pupils' communication skills incrementally and systematically.   2. THE QUALITY OF TEACHING  The quality of teaching is good overall. Teachers have engaged in a range of continuous professional development courses to further their pedagogical knowledge for developing pupils’ learning. Overall, they have very good classroom management skills. They create inclusive learning environments based on mutual respect, affirmation and trust.   Teachers’ collective practice in the successful implementation of whole-school approaches to writing genres and comprehensive strategies in English and to problem-solving in Mathematics is highly commendable.   Overall, the majority of lessons observed were appropriately structured and paced with purposeful opportunities for pupils to apply and consolidate their learning. Where very good practice was observed, learning intentions and success criteria were shared with pupils and there was an appropriate balance between teacher-led input and pupil participation. In a small number of lessons, insufficient opportunities were provided for pupils to engage in active and collaborative learning. Teachers should place greater emphasis on facilitating a more effective balance of teacher and pupil-led learning during lessons.    Supports for pupils with special education needs are delivered in a variety of modes, including withdrawal, station-teaching and in-class interventions. Programmes of work provided are closely aligned to pupils’ prioritised needs. In a few instances, teachers should reduce the number of learning targets outlined in pupil support plans to facilitate the monitoring of pupil attainment more effectively.    Teachers use a range of assessments, including diagnostic testing, to inform the provision of differentiated learning activities and cater for pupils’ varying abilities. Highly effective use of pupil self-assessment strategies, including innovative use of digital technologies, was noted in a few instances. Overall, there is considerable variance in teachers’ approaches to developing pupils’ self-assessment skills in identifying strengths and areas for development as learners. Teachers should adopt whole-school approaches to support pupils to reflect constructively on their learning in a more consistent and developmental manner.    3. THE QUALITY OF SUPPORT FOR PUPILS’ WELL-BEING  The quality of support for pupils’ well-being is very good. Teachers and leaders use a variety of strategies to establish an orderly, secure and healthy learning environment. These include valuable links with outside agencies and feeder schools, the implementation of well-being promotion programmes and provision of a breakfast club for pupils.   Teachers make praiseworthy efforts to facilitate and develop pupils’ leadership capacities. This is evident through pupils’ participation in a variety of committees encompassing the promotion of physical activity, digital learning and environmental care. Building on the democratic culture that exists within the school, consideration should be given to the establishment of a pupil council to further promote pupil voice in relevant decision-making.    Pupils are provided with opportunities to participate in a broad range of co-curricular activities. They are enabled to create and issue a newsletter to the school community on a regular basis, celebrating their achievements in various aspects of their learning.   4. THE QUALITY OF LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT   The quality of leadership and management is very good. The board meets regularly and is well informed about overall educational standards. It plays an active role in policy formation and review, and the provision of resources to support teaching and learning.  The principal has fostered a collaborative culture in the school community with high levels of commitment to inclusion and the promotion of well-being. The principal and the leadership and management team undertake a wide range of duties diligently; they lead teaching and learning initiatives very successfully. In the Inspectorate questionnaires, almost all parents reported that the school is well run and all teachers agreed that the school’s leadership and management system is effective.  Procedures for the systematic review and development of whole-school curricular plans are well established. Many of these plans provide suitable guidance and support to inform teachers’ classroom practice. In a minority of instances, aspects of whole-school curriculum plans are not fully contextualised to the school and its learners. Future reviews should place additional emphasis on the incremental development of learning content and skills.   A wide range of channels exists to promote meaningful two-way communication between home and school. The board should support the formal re-establishment of the parents’ association with a view to further enhancing parental involvement in policy development.    The school provides placements for student teachers. Such engagement in initial teacher education programmes is welcome as it can provide valuable professional benefits for student teachers and the teacher education institution.    5. THE QUALITY OF SCHOOL SELF-EVALUATION  The overall quality of SSE is very good. A culture of collaboration and improvement has been nurtured through the school’s purposeful engagement in the SSE process focusing on aspects of literacy, numeracy and digital learning. It is evident that the agreed actions in these areas are impacting positively on teachers’ practice and pupils’ learning experiences. Leaders and teachers’ collective ability to reflect on current provision and identify successes and areas for development is noteworthy.     Published December 2020 / Foilsithe Nollaig 2020
